docs: add bazel guide (#90)
windmilleng/tilt.build: docs/building_images_with_bazel.md

---
tilt: Building Images with Bazel
layout: docs
---

# Building Images with Bazel

There's nothing more frustrating than using a tool that works perfectly except for _one_ small thing. Even if the tool is open source it can be a daunting task to get a change accepted to it.

> We recognize that everyone's set up is different and that we cannot foresee all possible features and use cases that folks will need. Software is complicated! As a result we designed Tilt to be customizable from the beginning. If there's functionality you wish Tilt had you can often add it yourself, right in your Tiltfile, no external pull requests necessary!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recognize that everyone's set up is different and that we cannot foresee all possible features and use cases that folks will need. Software is complicated! As a result we designed Tilt to be customizable from the beginning. If there's functionality you wish Tilt had you can often add it yourself, right in your Tiltfile, no code changes or pull requests necessary!
```

This might be nitty, but the "external" in "external pull requests" rubbed me a bit weirdly - it's framed relative to tilt devs, who are not the intended audience.

Let's explore this with a simple feature request: I want Tilt to support the [Bazel](https://bazel.build/) build system. I can hear you now: but that's not simple at all! It's actually a lot simpler than you'd think, let's see why.

> _Note: Before diving in to this guide you should have run through [Tilt's Getting Started Guide](tutorial.html) and the deep dive in to [Tiltfile concepts](tiltfile_concepts.html). A familiarity with the Bazel build system will also clear a lot of things up but isn't necessary. Ready? Let's get started!_

Reviewer: the "A familiarity with the Bazel build system" feels a bit weird if this doc is now "how to use tilt with your existing bazel build" rather than "here's an example of implementing a thing in the Tiltfile!"

  bazel-bin/snack-server
INFO: Elapsed time: 0.331s, Critical Path: 0.04s
INFO: 0 processes.
INFO: Build completed successfully, 3 total actions
INFO: Build completed successfully, 3 total actions
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  labels: {app: snack, owner: varowner}
  name: varowner-snack
spec:
  selector:
    matchLabels: {app: snack, owner: varowner}
  template:
    metadata:
      labels: {app: snack, owner: varowner, tier: web}
    spec:
      containers:
      - image: bazel/snack@sha256:5a7e2fd3bd39a841cad0f009d605e7f5337a50d2cf641c50ebc03148d8257a0b
        name: snack
        ports:
        - {containerPort: 8083}
        resources:
          requests: {cpu: 10m}
```

With just this we have enough to write our Tiltfile. We'll be using the `local` function to call Bazel and `k8s_yaml` to tell Tilt about the YAML that Bazel generates. Let's write a function that given a Bazel target name returns the YAML for that target.

```python
def bazel_k8s(target):
  return local("bazel run %s" % target)
```

Easy enough, now in the main body of our Tiltfile we can call it like so:

```python
k8s_yaml(bazel_k8s(":snack-server"))
```

> And if we Tilt up we should see that Tilt calls Bazel to build the YAML, and by extension its image and then Tilt takes that YAML and deploys it to the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And if we `tilt up` we should see that Tilt calls Bazel to build the YAML, and by extension its image and then Tilt takes that YAML and deploys it to the cluster.
```

### Building Images
Now for the second component: images. Let's follow the same strategy and figure out the Bazel command that will just build an image and then integrate it in to the Tiltfile.

> From reading about rules_k8s I've learned that it uses rules_docker under the hood for building images. Another [quick glance at rules_docker's documentation](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_docker#using-with-docker-locally) reveals that `bazel run //:targetname` will load the image in to the configured docker daemon. Perfect, that's all we need!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From reading about rules_k8s, we learn that it uses rules_docker under the hood for building images. Another [quick glance at rules_docker's documentation](https://github.com/bazelbuild/rules_docker#using-with-docker-locally) reveals that `bazel run //:targetname` will load the image in to the configured docker daemon. Perfect, that's all we need!
```

Now we're passing the dependencies to our `custom_build`. If any of those change we will build a new image and update the YAML with the new image. Same as above: if any of the dependencies of the image rule itself change Tilt will now re-execute the Tiltfile.

Phew! This was a lot to learn but we ended up with a Tiltfile that is respnsive and fully integrates with Bazel with not that much code. It looks like this:

```python
BAZEL_RUN_CMD = "bazel run --platforms=@io_bazel_rules_go//go/toolchain:linux_amd64 %s"

BAZEL_SOURCES_CMD = """
  bazel query 'filter("^//", kind("source file", deps(set(%s))))' --order_output=no
  """.strip()

BAZEL_BUILDFILES_CMD = """
  bazel query 'filter("^//", buildfiles(deps(set(%s))))' --order_output=no
  """.strip()

def watch_labels(labels):
  watched_files = []
  for l in labels:
    if l.startswith("@"):
      continue
    elif l.startswith("//external/") or l.startswith("//external:"):
      continue
    elif l.startswith("//"):
      l = l[2:]

    path = l.replace(":", "/")
    if path.startswith("/"):
      path = path[1:]

    watch_file(path)
    watched_files.append(path)

>   return watched_files

Reviewer: Does nothing use this? Would it be clearer if we dropped the return value?

def bazel_k8s(target):
  build_deps = str(local(BAZEL_BUILDFILES_CMD % target)).splitlines()
  source_deps = str(local(BAZEL_SOURCES_CMD % target)).splitlines()
  watch_labels(build_deps)
  watch_labels(source_deps)

  return local("bazel run %s" % target)

def bazel_build(image, target):
  build_deps = str(local(BAZEL_BUILDFILES_CMD % target)).splitlines()
  watch_labels(build_deps)

  source_deps = str(local(BAZEL_SOURCES_CMD % target)).splitlines()

>   source_deps_files =bazel_labels_to_files(source_deps)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  source_deps_files = bazel_labels_to_files(source_deps)
```
